QUESTION
Q1: What do different columns in the output of EXPLAIN mean? What possible values can those have? What is the meaning of those values?
ANSWERS
MYSQL explain statement can be used to explore the order that the optimizer chooses to process queries.
Different columns in explain:
1) id : It means the number of the query.
2) select_type : The Type of SELECT statement being used.
3) table: the table for the output row.
4) Type: The join type


5) Possible key: The keys that could be used to find rows in the table
6) Key: key that is actually used
7) Key len: The length of key mysql decided to use , that is the length of the key in the key column.
8) Ref: The column comapred to the indexes or which columns are compare to the index shown in key column
9) Rows: numbers of rows that will be raed to execute the query.
10)Extra: provides additional information about how mysql executes the query.

A)
Select type : 

Simple – no join or subquery is used. It is just the normal select
Primary –  it is the outermost select --------
Union -   Union query or Second or later SELECT statement in a UNION
Derived-  if a select query is placed in from the clause which creates the derived table.
Sub query – 	First SELECT in subquery
B)
Table :

The name of the table to which the row of output refers. This can also be one of the following values:
1) <unionM,N>: The row refers to the union of the rows with id values of M and N.
2) <derivedN>: The row refers to the derived table result for the row with an id value of N. 
               A derived table may result, for example, from a subquery in the FROM clause.
3) <subqueryN>: The row refers to the result of a materialized subquery for the row with an id value of N.

C) 
TYPE :
1) System:  Can have at most one row.
2) eq ref: One row is read from this table for each combination of rows from the previous tables. 
3) Index: result fetched from index.
4) All : entire table is scanned for query execution.
5) ref : All rows with matching index values are read from this table for each combination of rows from the previous tables
6) Ref or null : same aseq_ref except it allows null value or null conditions
7) Fulltext : The join is performed using a FULLTEXT index.
8) Ref or null : This join type is like ref, but with the addition that MySQL does an extra search 
for rows that contain NULL values. This join type optimization is used most often in resolving subqueries.
9) Index merge : use of 2 index on same table.
10) Range : used when index exist and  range (<,><=,>=,in,between) are used in where clause

D)
EXTRA :
1) Distinct : MySQL is looking for distinct values, so it stops searching for more rows for the current row combination 
after it has found the first matching row.
2) Not Exists : MySQL was able to do a LEFT JOIN optimization on the query and does not examine more rows in this table for
the previous row combination after it finds one row that matches the LEFT JOIN criteria.
3) Range checked for each record : Server found no good index to use, but checks indexes for each row. 
Slow, but faster than a full table scan.
4) Using filesort : Server will need to do an extra pass to sort the rows.
5) Using index : Server is able to return rows directly from the index instead of doing an additional seek to
read the actual rows. Generally good news.
6) Using temporary : Server will need to create a temporary table to hold results. 
Often occurs with differing GROUP BY and ORDER BY columns.
7) Using where : Server is using values in the WHERE clause to limit returned rows.

Question
2.1 The value under 'rows' column in the output of EXPLAIN query and SELECT query after it are same. What does it mean?
2.2 Is the SELECT query optimal? If no, how do we optimize it?

Answers
2.1 It means that the entire table was traversed to execute the query i.e. it traverse the row 1002345 times and “All” type was used.
2.2 No the select query is not optimal. We can  make it optimal by adding a index to user_id since it will be having maximum lookup

Question
3.1 We decide to index columns in comments table to optimize the SELECT query. What column(s) will you index in which order?
Ask the exercise creator for a hint if you are confused.

Answers
3.1 Since the table comments will be having lots of insertion, the use of index on this table is not recommended as it can 
slow down the applications insert and update .The comment table will have more frequent insert.
But at the same time it will also have a lots of lookup so we can add index on user_id,
since it will be having the widest range of values and  value for this column will not be repeating frequently,
and then we can add index on commentable_id.

Question
Q4:
4.1 EXPLAIN a SELECT query against one of your databases which employs an INNER JOIN between two tables. 
What does the output look like? What does the values under different columns mean? Do you get only one row in EXPLAIN's output?
4.2 Form the same select query in above question using a subquery instead of a JOIN.
What does the EXPLAIN output look like now? Which query is better and why?

Answers

4.1




4.2
